(The aforementioned belief amounts to –) 'The Self is made ignorant by the karmas and, likewise, he is made knowledgeable by the karmas. Karmas send the Self to sleep and, likewise, he is awakened by the karmas. Karmas make the Self happy and, likewise, he is made miserable by the karmas. It is by the karmas that the Self is brought to wrong belief and non-discipline, and is made to wander in the upper, middle, and lower worlds.
All virtuous or wicked happenings are the handiwork of the karmas. Because the karma does, karma gives, and it is the karma that takes away; therefore, all souls are proved to be without any action.'
(It also amounts to –) The karmic matter of the nature of male sex-passion creates a longing for woman and the karmic matter of the nature of female sex-passion creates a longing for man; this has come about from the ancient teachings of the Âchârya, and, as per this doctrine, there is no soul which is unchaste.
Then, killing others and getting killed by others will also be attributed to the nature of karma. The name karma of injury by others (parghâta) implies this meaning, and, therefore, as per your doctrine, no soul can cause injury as it is only the material karma which kills the material karma.’
(Says the Âchârya –) If any monks preach such doctrine of the Sânkhya system, then, in their view, the material karmas do everything, and, hence, it follows that all souls are inactive.
Or (in order to substantiate your theory that the karmas do everything –) if you hold, 'My soul transforms itself by itself', then this opinion of yours is perverse thinking.
Soul has been described in sacred scriptures as eternal and having innumerable points of space. The soul, on its own accord, is incapable of increasing or decreasing its spatial points.
Know that, from the point of view of extension, the soul is coextensive with the universe. Since the soul, on its own accord, is incapable of increasing or decreasing its spatial points, how can you say that the soul transforms itself by itself?
If you accept that the knowing substance exists with its knowing nature, then also it is established that the soul does not transform itself by itself.