Just as chalk, when applied to a board etc., does not become one with that board etc., but retains its own identity characterized by whiteness, similarly, the knower Self, while knowing an object, does not become one with that known object, but retains his own identity as a knower.
Just as chalk does not become one with an alien substance, but retains its own identity characterized by whiteness, similarly, the perceiver Self, while perceiving an object, does not become one with that perceived object, but retains his own identity as a perceiver.
Just as chalk does not become one with an alien substance, but retains its own identity characterized by whiteness, similarly, the Self with restraint, while exercising restraint from an external object, does not become one with that object, but retains his own identity as possessor of restraint.
Just as chalk does not become one with an alien substance, but retains its own identity characterized by whiteness, similarly, the Self with right faith, while ascertaining an external object as it is, does not become one with that object, but retains his own identity as possessor of right faith.
Knowledge, faith, and conduct, from the transcendental point of view, have thus been described. Now listen to their brief description from the empirical point of view.
Just as chalk whitens the alien substance (a board etc.) because of its intrinsic nature (of whiteness), similarly, the knower Self knows the alien substance because of his intrinsic nature of being a knower.
Just as chalk whitens the alien substance (a board etc.) because of its intrinsic nature (of whiteness), similarly, the perceiver Self perceives the alien substance because of his intrinsic nature of perception.
Just as chalk whitens the alien substance (a board etc.) because of its intrinsic nature (of whiteness), similarly, the Self who knows renounces the alien substance because of his intrinsic nature of non-attachment.
Just as chalk whitens the alien substance (a board etc.) because of its intrinsic nature (of whiteness), similarly, the Self with right faith ascertains the alien substance as it is because of his intrinsic nature of right faith.
Knowledge, faith, and conduct, from the empirical point of view, have thus been described. The other modes (of consciousness) should be understood similarly.