Scripture is not knowledge because scripture does not comprehend anything. Therefore, knowledge is one thing and scripture another; this has been proclaimed by the Omniscient Lord.
Spoken word is not knowledge because spoken word does not comprehend anything. Therefore, knowledge is one thing and spoken word another; this has been proclaimed by the Omniscient Lord.
Visual form is not knowledge because visual form does not comprehend anything. Therefore, knowledge is one thing and visual form another; this has been proclaimed by the Omniscient Lord.
Colour (sight) is not knowledge because colour does not comprehend anything. Therefore, knowledge is one thing and colour another; this has been proclaimed by the Omniscient Lord.
Smell (odour) is not knowledge because smell does not comprehend anything. Therefore, knowledge is one thing and smell another; this has been proclaimed by the Omniscient Lord.
Taste (flavour) is not knowledge because taste does not comprehend anything. Therefore, knowledge is one thing and taste another; this has been proclaimed by the Omniscient Lord.
Touch (physical contact) is not knowledge because touch does not comprehend anything. Therefore, knowledge is one thing and touch another; this has been proclaimed by the Omniscient Lord.
Karma is not knowledge because karma does not comprehend anything. Therefore, knowledge is one thing and karma another; this has been proclaimed by the Omniscient Lord.
Medium of motion (dharma – the non-soul substance) is not knowledge because medium of motion does not comprehend anything. Therefore, knowledge is one thing and medium of motion another; this has been proclaimed by the Omniscient Lord.
Medium of rest (adharma – the non-soul substance) is not knowledge because medium of rest does not comprehend anything. Therefore, knowledge is one thing and medium of rest another; this has been proclaimed by the Omniscient Lord.
Time (kâla – the non-soul substance) is not knowledge because time does not comprehend anything. Therefore, knowledge is one thing and time another; this has been proclaimed by the Omniscient Lord.
Space (âkâsh – the non-soul substance) is not knowledge because space does not comprehend anything. Therefore, knowledge is one thing and space another; this has been proclaimed by the Omniscient Lord.
Thought-activity is not knowledge because thought-activity is non-conscious. Therefore, knowledge is one thing and thought-activity another.
Because the soul always knows, therefore, the knower soul is enlightened. It must be understood that knowledge is not separate from the knower.
Those who know (Ganadhardeva – the primary disciple Âchâryas of Lord Jina) consider knowledge to be same as right belief, self-restraint, sacred sûtras of anga-pûrva, merit and demerit, and asceticism.